<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->
[![zelig-logo](man/figures/zelig.png)](http://zeligproject.org)

<!--- Badges ----->
**Release:** [![CRAN
Version](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/Zelig)](http://cran.r-project.org/package=Zelig)
![CRAN Monthly
Downloads](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/last-month/Zelig) ![CRAN
Total Downloads](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/Zelig)

**Development:** [![Project Status: Active - The project has reached a
stable, usable state and is being actively
developed.](http://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](http://www.repostatus.org/#active)
[![Travis (LINUX) Build
Status](https://travis-ci.org/IQSS/Zelig.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/IQSS/Zelig)
[![AppVeyor (Windows) Build
Status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/IQSS/Zelig?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/IQSS/Zelig)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/IQSS/Zelig/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/IQSS/Zelig)
[![Gitter
chat](https://badges.gitter.im/Zelig-dev/gitter.png)](https://gitter.im/Zelig-dev/Lobby?utm_source=share-link&utm_medium=link&utm_campaign=share-link)
[Dev-Blog](https://medium.com/zelig-dev)

The release of Zelig 5.0 expands the set of models available, while
simplifying the model wrapping process, and solving architectural
problems by completely rewriting into R’s Reference Classes for a fully
object-oriented architecture. Comparability wrappers are available so
that you can still use pre-Zelig 5 syntax.

Zelig 5 workflow overview
-------------------------

All models in Zelig 5 can be estimated and results explored presented
using a five simple steps:

-   Initialise the Zelig object, e.g with `z.out <- zls$new()` for a
    least squares model. Then populate the object with:

-   `zelig` to estimate the parameters,

-   `setx` to set fitted values for which we want to find quantities of
    interest,

-   `sim` to simulate the quantities of interest,

-   `graph` to plot the simulation results.

### Differences from Zelig 4 and backwards compatability

Zelig 5 uses [reference classes](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/R5.html) which
work a bit differently from what you may expect in R. The big difference
is that they are "mutable", i.e. assigning values to them does not
overwrite the objects previous contents.

Zelig 5 does contain wrappers (largely) allowing you to use Zelig 4
syntax if you'd like. Here is an example workflow with Zelig 5:

    z5 <- zls$new()
    z5$zelig(Y ~ X1 + X ~ X, weights = w, data = mydata)
    z5$setx()
    z5$sim()
    z5$graph()

Here is the same set of operations using the Zelig 4 wrappers:

    z.out <- zelig(Y ~ X1 + X2, model = "ls", weights = w, data = mydata)
    x.out <- setx(z.out)
    s.out <- sim(z.out, x = x.out)
    plot(s.out)

Note that all of the output objects from the Zelig 4 wrappers are Zelig
5 reference class objects, so you can mix and match which syntax you
like.

Zelig 5 Quickstart Guide
------------------------

Let’s walk through an example. This example uses the swiss dataset. It
contains data on fertility and socioeconomic factors in Switzerland’s 47
French-speaking provinces in 1888 (Mosteller and Tukey, 1977, 549-551).
We will model the effect of education on fertility, where education is
measured as the percent of draftees with education beyond primary school
and fertility is measured using the common standardized fertility
measure (see Muehlenbein (2010, 80-81) for details).

Installing and Loading Zelig
----------------------------

If you haven't already done so, open your R console and install Zelig:

    install.packages('Zelig')

Alternatively you can install the development version with:

    devtools::install_github('IQSS/Zelig')

Once Zelig is installed, load it:

    library(Zelig)

Building Models
---------------

Let’s assume we want to estimate the effect of education on fertility.
Since fertility is a continuous variable, least squares is an
appropriate model choice. We first create a Zelig least squares object:

    # initialize Zelig5 least squares object
    z5 <- zls$new()

To estimate our model, we call the `zelig()` method, which is a function
that is internal to the Zelig object. We pass the `zelig()` method two
arguments: equation and data:

    # estimate ls model
    z5$zelig(Fertility ~ Education, data = swiss)

    # model summary
    summary(z5)

    ## Model:
    ##
    ## Call:
    ## z5$zelig(formula = Fertility ~ Education, data = swiss)
    ##
    ## Residuals:
    ##     Min      1Q  Median      3Q     Max
    ## -17.036  -6.711  -1.011   9.526  19.689
    ##
    ## Coefficients:
    ##             Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|)
    ## (Intercept)  79.6101     2.1041  37.836  < 2e-16
    ## Education    -0.8624     0.1448  -5.954 3.66e-07
    ##
    ## Residual standard error: 9.446 on 45 degrees of freedom
    ## Multiple R-squared:  0.4406, Adjusted R-squared:  0.4282
    ## F-statistic: 35.45 on 1 and 45 DF,  p-value: 3.659e-07
    ##
    ## Next step: Use 'setx' method

The -0.8624 coefficient on education suggests a negative relationship
between the education of a province and its fertility rate. More
precisely, for every one percent increase in draftees educated beyond
primary school, the fertility rate of the province decreases 0.8624
units. To help us better interpret this finding, we may want other
quantities of interest, such as expected values or first differences.
Zelig makes this simple by automating the translation of model estimates
into interpretable quantities of interest using Monte Carlo simulation
methods (see King, Tomz, and Wittenberg (2000) for more information).
For example, let’s say we want to examine the effect of increasing the
percent of draftees educated from 5 to 15. To do so, we set our
predictor value using the `setx()` method:

    # set education to 5
    z5$setx(Education = 5)

    # set education to 15
    z5$setx1(Education = 15)

    # model summary
    summary(z5)

    ## setx:
    ##   (Intercept) Education
    ## 1           1         5
    ## setx1:
    ##   (Intercept) Education
    ## 1           1        15
    ##
    ## Next step: Use 'sim' method

After setting our predictor value, we simulate using the `sim()` method:

    # run simulations and estimate quantities of interest
    z5$sim()

    # model summary
    summary(z5)

    ##
    ##  sim x :
    ##  -----
    ## ev
    ##       mean       sd      50%     2.5%    97.5%
    ## 1 75.25386 1.624169 75.27712 72.29926 78.42785
    ## pv
    ##          mean      sd      50%     2.5%    97.5%
    ## [1,] 75.67124 9.46876 75.86216 57.19442 93.84189
    ##
    ##  sim x1 :
    ##  -----
    ## ev
    ##       mean       sd      50%     2.5%    97.5%
    ## 1 66.70171 1.543556 66.63554 63.80424 69.89197
    ## pv
    ##          mean       sd      50%     2.5%   97.5%
    ## [1,] 67.26523 9.408431 67.37761 48.55274 85.9508
    ## fd
    ##        mean       sd       50%      2.5%     97.5%
    ## 1 -8.552144 1.494392 -8.493887 -11.49664 -5.719183

At this point, we’ve estimated a model, set the predictor value, and
estimated easily interpretable quantities of interest. The `summary()`
method shows us our quantities of interest, namely, our expected and
predicted values at each level of education, as well as our first
differences–the difference in expected values at the set levels of
education.

Visualizations
==============

Zelig’s `graph()` method plots the estimated quantities of interest:

    z5$graph()

![](man/figures/example_plot_graph-1.png)

We can also simulate and plot simulations from ranges of simulated
values. For example, first use the `setrange` method to set a range of
fitted values for one of the covariates and draw simulations as before:

    z5 <- zls$new()
    z5$zelig(Fertility ~ Education, data = swiss)

    # set Education to range from 5 to 15 at single integer increments
    z5$setrange(Education = 5:15)

    # run simulations and estimate quantities of interest
    z5$sim()

Then use the `graph()` method as before:

    z5$graph()

![](man/figures/example_plot_ci_plot-1.png)
